---
layout: post
title:  "Ruby"
date:   2015-03-28 07:24:32
categories: programming
---

* __Ruby and Scalability__
  * If github, airbnb and hulu can use it successfully, so can you.
  * Hulu is handling almost 10M unique visitors per month
  * Great for developer productivity and happiness

* __Implementations__
  * MRI, YARV, Jruby, Rubinius
  * Jruby and Rubinius have better thread support

* __Features__
  * Duck Typing - An object's type is determined by its data and methods
  * Open Classes
  * Meta Programming - Modify classes and methods at runtime
  * Inheritance - Does not support multiple inheritance, but provides modules and mixins
  * Multiple paradigms - supports multiple paradigms like oop and functional
  * Automated memory management (garbage collection)

* __Modules__
  * Modules have 3 main usecases
  * Namespacing
  * `include` If you have methods that could be used in several classes, extract them to a module and include it in the classes. Each object has access to those methods. Modules may have requirements about what attributes are defined in the class
  * `extend` Instead of the entire class, if we want only a particular object to have access to the module's functionality we can say `my_obj.extend my_module`

* __Executing Ruby Code__
  * `ruby main_file.rb` - on terminal
  * `cmd + B`- on sublime text

* __String vs Symbol__
  * Symbols are immutable

* __Require__
  * `require awesome`
  * File extension is not required
  * Works with absolute and relative paths
  * Loads the file only the first time it is encountered

* __Load__
  * `load amazing.rb`
  * File extension is required
  * Works with absolute and relative paths
  * Loads the file every single time it encounters the statement
  * Does not check if the file is already loaded
  * Good for exploratory code loading
  * Make changes to the file and load them again in a single session

* __Include__
  * Modules and reusable code

* __Extend__
  * For class methods
  
* __Block__
  * Blocks are inspired by functional programming language Lisp. Functional programming languages encapsulate functions insdie variables, which could then be passed around and executed when needed.
  * Blocks can have 2 notiations - Piece of code enclosed between { } or do end. Hash has curly braces too, but only encloses key-value pairs.
  * Passed as parameter to methods, which can then execute the block anytime using the `yield` keyword
  * Blocks can take parameters 1 for array and 2 for hash passed between the || characters

* __Proc__
  * Procs & lambdas are ruby blocks. Instead of declaring them anonymously, we assign a proc to a variable
  * Variable can then be passed to a method

* __Lambda__
  * Lambda differs from the proc by requiring all the arguments to be passed correctly
  * Used to define scopes in rails models

* __Range__
  * `..` - both inclusive
  * `...` - last element excluded

* __Variable Arguments__
  * 
  ``` 
  def compute_result(*param)
    # Do something
  end

  compute_result(1,2,3,4)
  ```
* __Exceptions__
  * Exceptions are ruby classes
  * `ZeroDivisionError`
  * `NameError` - when you call a method that is not defined
  * `ArgumentError` 
  * `raise`
  * `begin`
  * `rescue` - stop the errors from crashing the program. Enclosed in a begin-end block
  * `end`
  * `ensure`
  * Rest of the code could not be executed
  * `catch`
  * `throw`

* __break__
  * Terminates the innermost 

* __`&:` Operator__

* __Meta Programming__
  * Not all languages have meta programming capabilities. Example: C
  * Java is catching up
  * Code that writes code
  * Manipulate elements in runtime. Dynamically create classes, methods and variables
  * `ActiveRecord` makes heavy use of metaprogramming. Dynamic Finders like `find_by_title` do not actually exist in the codebase.
  * Most classes are inherited from `BasicObject` `Object` or `Kernel`. Use the `ancestors` method
  * Define `method_missing`
  ```
  def method_missing method_name, *args, &block

  end
  ```
* __Struct__
  * `Struct` - bundles a group of variables
  * Can be used as Light weight classes
  * Inherits from the Enumerable
  * Structs can be used to pre determine the attributes of a class

* __Set__
  * `Set` is like an array, but enforces uniqueness
  * Responds to intersection, difference, merge etc

* __Hash -Freq Used Methods__
  * `h1 = Hash.new`
  * `h1 = {}`
  * `h1["author"]="matz"`
  * `h1[:title]="ruby"`
  * `h1.keys`
  * `h1.values`
  * `h1.delete(k)`
  * `h1.has_key?(k)`
  * `h1.has_value?(k)`
  * `h1.flatten` - converts hash to an array
  * `h1.to_a` - converts each pair into an array
  * `h1.invert` - reverts k & v
  * `h1.reject{|k,v| k <5}` - 
  * `h1.each{|k,v| v*10}`

* __Enumerable Methods__
  * `Enumerable` module provides collection classes with several traversal, search and sort methods
  * The class much provide an `each` method which yields successive members of the collection
  * If `max` `min` or `sort` methods are to be used, then the collection must also implement a `<=>` method
  * `all?`
  * `any?`
  * `none?`
  * `one?`
  * `map`
  * `each_with_index`
  * `select`
  * `inject`
  * `reduce`
  * 

